Concrete / Discrete - A Tale of Two Villas

Concrete does not grow old gracefully. Glance at a tower block on your nearest city skyline. Or walk, as I did recently, around the Forêt des Écrivains Combattants in the Languedoc, a memorial to French writers who died in the First World War, and find typed laminate sheets stuck over the concrete plaques because the inscriptions have crumbled away. Of course, there are exceptions - the dome of the Pantheon in Rome for example, but even that lets in water! Concrete's strength is structural not aesthetic. It's also cheap. Yet attitudes to concrete were not always set. Take the French architect and set designer Robert Mallet-Stevens (1886 – 1945), second only to Le Corbusier in France. The Centre Pompidou, Paris hosted a solo exhibition of his work in 2005. He planted concrete trees in the grounds of his (concrete) Tourist Pavilion at the 1925 Exhibition of Decorative Arts in Paris. Concrete was, he felt, the most suitable material for his "primarily geometrical art"[1].
One of Mallet-Stevens' first commissions was to design a house for Paul Poiret, the French couturier whose designs incorporated the "debauch of colour"[2] from Leon Bakst's costumes and sets for the Ballet Russes into wallpapers, textiles and carpets. Lauvin blue, hot pink, lime green, chrome yellow, Poiret took Bakst's palette of barbaric hues and turned up the contrast. Yet his house, near the village of Mézy-sur-Seine in the countryside around Paris, became just the opposite: "all white, pure, majestic and a little provocative, like a lily"[3]. This monotone came from black and white film. Until Poiret hired him in 1921, Mallet-Stevens had only made film sets and interiors. These experiences fed directly into his first architectural project: straight and direct lines worked better on camera; contrasts between light and dark helped to exaggerate volume and counteract the camera's flattening effects; a ratio of 3:4 suited the rectangle of the cinema screen. The result should have been a prototype of photogenic architecture, one of the first buildings designed as much for the camera's lens as the eye. In fact, it became one of the first modern ruins. 
Poiret ran out of money in 1923 with only the skeleton of his house completed. Mallet-Stevens published photographs of the stalled project in 1927. A single leafless tree, like Giacometti's for the 1961 production of Waiting for Godot, stands at the forefront. Debris is scattered around. The windows are dark voids and the concrete is blotchy. The building is a ruin before it has been finished. Yet this photograph is like an X-ray of Mallet-Stevens' architectural style. It captures the sharp edges and clean curves, and highlights the harmony of the building's spatial relationships.
Poiret lived for a time in the concrete cube of the guardhouse, draped in furs and huddled around a wood fire, hoping to accumulate enough money to complete the project. He never did. The house remained empty until 1933, when the French actress, Elvire Popesco, bought it and commissioned Mallet-Stevens to complete the project. The Second World War disrupted these plans. Eventually, another architect, Paul Boyer, finished the house, but he modified the original design, smoothing the angled terrace and replacing some of the windows with portholes, concessions to the vogue for Art Deco. The house was recently on the market for $2.14m, with renovation costs estimated to be least $2m. 
In 1925, Mallet-Stevens finished another more famous project - the Villa Noailles in Hyères. When this villa was completed, its owner, Charles de Noilles, asked Man Ray to make a documentary about it. In this film, Les Mystères du château du Dé (1928), the building becomes as indispensable as the characters. Architecture is a concrete presence, acting in a way which forecasts Antoninio's London in Blow Up or Fellini's Rome in La dolce vita.
Mallet-Stevens built and arranged the Villa Noailles and the house at Mézy for the camera like film sets. Concrete was the only material with which he could construct his straight lines and curves on a large scale. And concrete condemned the buildings to grow old grubbily. Yet even when, as Philip Larkin said, all that remains is concrete and tyres, the houses have been captured on film. These images represent the triumph of concrete over its ugliness.
 
 


[1] Mallet-Stevens, Writings
[2] Quoted in C Spencer, The World of Serge Diaghilev (NY 1979), 160.
[3] Poiret, Memoirs
