Postcard - Nimbin and Uki, New South Wales, Australia
 
There are no fat people in Nimbin. Is this due to heroin or yoga? It is probably a bit of both, perhaps not at the same time. In 1973 the Aquarius Festival happened here. The after effects still hang over the town today. The buildings swirl with fluorescent paint. The rusty carcass of a VW Campervan lies in the doorway of the museum ("hours as they please, but usually daily"). Crusty-bearded "characters" skulk and swagger around. Talk in the many cafes is of "energy". Not the solar power harnessed by the Rainbow Power Co at 1 Alternative Way, but "psychic energy" as in "he pushed me across the room and didn't even touch me". The clothing combinations – brogues, board shorts, tie dye – are contrived in their strangeness, as if the residents are in competition. Yet Nimbin is not about ageing hippies, it is about their children.
 
Nimbin has more signs than an astrologers' convention. In the park, a catalogue of negatives range from no horses to no golf. In the toilets, notices ask: "Are you having an overdose?" "Are you being raped?" Surveillance cameras eyeball the streets. Have the hippies found free love too costly? In the park a girl with a pram picked a package from her bra and passed it to a man. Across the road, a woman was vomiting in the gutter. There is teenage pregnancy and drug addiction. There are coffee shops and organic fruit stalls. Nimbin is a social experiment – results inconclusive.
 
Uki, nearby, is an alternative. It is the closest settlement to Wollumbin (1,150m), the central plug of a huge, shield-shaped volcano formed 20 million years ago. The mountain's crooked peak beckons clouds towards it like a finger. The locals still dress oddly: mullets, moustaches and hemp all abound. There is a shop selling crystals and notices about missing things: tools, horses, people. But the town is relaxed and has charm. It also has an excellent bookshop. We arrived around noon and soon found ourselves at a charity Christmas lunch for the Red Cross in the village hall. Billies of tea, quiches and Christmas pudding, served by a 90-year old yoga fanatic – all for $5.
 
After lunch we drove through the Border Ranges National Park, a World Heritage-listed rainforest. We passed through a stand of Antarctic Beech, some over 2,000 years old. The gravel road twisted up to Pinnacle Lookout. Only from this promontory can you take in the majestic caldera carved out of the lava over millions of years. We stood on this jut and panned around the valley bowl below. Clouds crowded around Wollumbin in the distance. This moist air trapped from the coast trickles down a myriad of small streams. On the drive down we found one by the roadside. Hanging Rock Creek is a deep rectangular pool fed by a waterfall. Turtles swan in the clear water. We swam with them. The Githabul people hold this place as sacred. Though the details are secret, it's not difficult to see why.  
