---
author: roberto
comments: false
date: 2013-02-25 16:34:33
layout: post
slug: story-2013
title: 'Story 2013'
categories:
- Blog
tags:
- conference
---
I went to [The Story 2013](http://thestory.org.uk/the-story-2013/) at The Conway Hall in London. 

Here's 

Ministry of stories

Use local area. See world through eyes of children.

Republic of Shoreditch 
http://www.ministryofstories.org/

---
Edwyn Collins  Ed Lovelace 
Collins - in your voice, in your heart - memory, identity, stroke

Wrote letter - let edwyn tell the story - space, time

Capture spirit - pace, atmosphere - belongs to subject ... 

------
Rebecca O’Brien
http://www.sixteenfilms.co.uk/people/profile/2/rebecca_o_brien/
Ken loach - spirit of 45 - what we neglect to remember about recent history
How to tell the story without narration - memories of people with stories to tell - interviewing people in groups of 2 or 3 - like a conversation. Provided framework for footage.


-----
Laura Dockrill
http://www.lauradockrill.co.uk/
Kids straightjacketed by grammar, punctuation 

Idea of writer - as far off as being an astronaut - lesbian, vegetarian

Let the imagination run free - writing is not boring. If you can talk, you can write.

Make kids feel like they are important - listened to - attention / focus

Matilda the show - over top - real world and make it weirder and stranger

Incredible enthusiasm - darcey - performance poet

--
Alex Balfour
http://www.alexbalfour.com/

Consistent narrative

Big theme / message

Correct inaccurate reporting

Simple, clear, structured - creative, integrated campaigns - discipline

Coordinate stakeholders

Collective activity - harness and shape - digital by default - massive demand and expectation to participate and consume digitally

How to bring out stories? Connect young people to values of olympics by giving voice to inspiring stories that represent those values and help people share those stories

Deliver stories - to every possible digital channel

Paralympic blogger project - let people tell their stories. - orchestrating emotion on a massive scale

----

Molly Crabapple http://mollycrabapple.com/

The artist must take sides - freedom or slavery


Distill the essential

Art - no pretence of objectivity

Use your work to interrogate the world and question power



----
Alecky Blythe 
http://www.curtisbrown.co.uk/alecky-blythe/
Verbatim plays - interview people - use their words - kaleidoscope of voices - 
Get stuff as it happens - fresh, spontaneous
Formal interview -  deadly, guarded

Tell stories outside media -- 

Actors speak the words while listening to headphones - fresh, no time for actor head to come. 

Drama spreads out and sends ripples way beyond the central story

London Road - phorensic detail - keep ums, ahs, non sequiturs 

Capturing people in the moment. V different from recollection after the event - fear / odd excitement

---
Writing stories, finding stories - good way to make a living - work on things you feel strongly about - emotional connection

----
Ben Boucquelet - The Amazing World of Gumball

Put a little piece of your heart

What the characters are up when your not watching

See the characters evolve out side the show. 

Write about something you love - only way to make anything good

-----
Diane Coyle 
Economists - Merton - options pricing. Models are economist's stories

Options equations - performative - brought the options market into being

Myths that mislead - words are not precise enough - shoddy use of words erodes the intellect - bacon 

--- 
Mikey Please 
http://www.theeaglemanstag.com/
Time - how it affects you and how you perceive it

Words per day / projects - graph

The relative value of time - percentage of life lived - unit of time

Time as a fraction

Downward parabola

Other view: monotony keeps us on that graph - experiences

Opening up, new experiences - counters the relative value of time

Set limits and parameters on projects - forces you to make decisions 

Watch film on YouTube

----
Fiona Romeo 

Maritime museum - narrative sceptic - can an exhibition be a story - potential to tell in time and space

Problems:
Non linear paths - challenge to narrative
Standing up - uncomfortable - reading 
Words themselves - academic in custody of objects

International Art English

Shared world - cory doctorow - set of rules used in many people working on surveillemce exhibition

Story to create atmosphere. 

Handed a torch - signals you are a participant

Norway - put wellies on and walk in to flooded room - puts you in the story

How do we plus that? How make it better from different perspectives? How to take things a bit further ? 



Exhibition- not great medium for storytelling

Books came out of those exhibitions 

Go deep on one object - objects in focus - reinterpret - story can reinvigorate 



----
Rob Manuel 
The bottom half of the internet --- don't read comments, meesageboards

Wrong -- keep listening to the world -- celebrity is a mask that eats into the face - updikes

Marxist view -- capitalists, petit bourgeois, proles

Media owner, journalists, commentards

Class issue -bottom half of the internet --- like below stairs 

Say nasty things ---- 

Columnists -- privelidged position

Outsource comments to twitter. -- not hosting libel

Twitter -- easier to control the conversation

Political awakening -- lobbiest handing opinions to mps


War on trolls -- owen jones -- chav demonise working class 

Media in position of power

Journalist - finding offensive comments and deliver them to offended person

No way to reach top of internet

No way to lead the conversation

Exclusion - 

Bottom half can be right - good examples 

Top and bottom have flaws

time and effort to moderate

They are free voices  





