
Muddy-crested eagles plunge behind a copse of satellite dishes fixed on flimsy bamboo. In the shade below, I am watching people watch television inside a shabby wooden hut. People watch a lot of television in Laung Prabang. From shops and stalls,  televisions buzz like flies. Laotians like flicking through the channels. This remote control somehow encapsulates the strange state of Laos. Energetic torpor: it is active yet passive, individual yet communal. And while the locals watch television, tourists gaze at yet more repeats of sunset over the Mekong.
 
Part of the character of Laung Prabang comes from the journey to get to it. Two days in a traditional narrow boat along the Mekong, it is very Apocalypse Now . Incessant trees line the banks. Strata of mud, the colour of ashes, bleed into the river. Soon the scenery becomes hypnotic, like a work of abstract art. By the time you scramble up the muddy bank after thirty-six hours cramped on a wooden bench, you have reached a suitably Laotian state of mind.
 
Laung Prabang has been a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1995. I had, I confess, expected something bigger. It is little more than a village perched on a spit of land at the confluence of the Mekong and Khan rivers. The buildings are a tasteful melange of wooden huts, crumbling French colonial and Buddhist wats set against a cloudless sky, cobalt like San Francisco's. Tasteful is the word here. With its chic restaurants, boutique hotels and luxury spas, it is as if the town has been designed by Conran. Even the monks, filing back from alms at dawn or chatting on Skype in Internet cafes, wear their bright orange robes with the razzmatazz of catwalk models. I sipped Beer Lao and nibbled jaew bong (dried water buffalo skin) to the soundtrack of chanting monks from the wat over the road. Only the man dotingly hosing down his new Toyota Hilux didn't seem to know the script.
 
Laung Prabang is a place shaped by escape: from American bombs in the 1970s and now from the concrete blocks sprouting like weeds across the rest of Laos. Can it escape the tyranny of taste? UNESCO may preserve the town's "outstanding universal value", but "universal" caters increasingly to rich tourists.
 
I shouldn't worry. Teenagers raced mopeds through the streets. Baskets of chillies dried in the sun. A man held his dog up to a tree to scare away a cat. I went for coffee. Laotian coffee is a taste inherited from the French - strong and black or sweet and syrupy with condensed milk. The cafe was on a busy junction. Nobody stopped, slowed down or even looked. Yet there were no collisions. By the roadside, the lines on the cafe's chalkboard broke to form traffic signs: "Continental Break/fast", "American Break/fast". A family drove by on a moped. The parents bookended the children. They approached the junction and passed through untroubled. They all had the same impassive gaze, as if watching television.  
