In Pakse, a town quietly bustling under a smouldering sun, I stumbled over children making castles in heaps of builder’s sand. Prepubescent foremen could, it seems, roughly cobble together better dwellings than their elders, who mostly live in concrete carcasses dotted haphazardly around town. Some structures have walls, other used concrete sacking to make walls. Most looked dilapidated, but in truth it was difficult to say whether the buildings were under construction or falling down.
            Pakse is the last town before Si Phan Don, the 4,000 Islands formed by the Mekong river fanning out along the border of southern Laos and northern Cambodia. It is a remote place. After fifteen hours on a bus from the Laotian capital Vientiane, you take a tuk-tuk across town to Pakse’s Southern Bus Terminal. The title is grandiose: it is, in fact, a market where buses stop occasionally. Strong winds stoke eddies of swirling dust, so that even at noon on a cloudless day, it is gloomy. No buses were going south, so I opted (the word hints at more choice than there was) for one of the sangathews, trucks with rows of padded benches, which ply the route. Hunkered on a bench, limbs yogicly furled, flanked by gnarled old women with earth-stained hands, we drove for three hours. Everyone got out at a patch of rubble, presumably the end of the line. I pressed on to the grassy slopes of the Mekong and found a boatman, who zigzagged me downriver, weaving through small islands, humped like the backs of semi-submerged beasts. What I am trying to say, I suppose, is that Si Phan Don feels remote. It is peristalsis, not the gulp of modern travel.
            Don Kon is the most tranquil island in the archipelago. Water buffalo graze around your dwelling and the din of generators stops five or six hours after the onset of dusk. For modern titillations, such as 24-hour electricity or an Internet connection, Don Det lies a few murky ripples away.
            There’s not a lot to “do”. Sunset is the main event in this domain. The quality of light at this time of day is stupendous. Tussocks of grass glint rosily and dust swims in the sun like goldfish. Then it goes dark, an inkblot, until locals crank up their generators and the hum and patch of flickering lights guides you back.
            Apart from sunset, the main sights are waterfalls and the “elusive” Irrawaddy dolphins. The waterfalls are a sight: millions of gallons of water in flux. Yet there are no great precipices here. The falls are squat and beefy like a heavyweight boxer. The other sight, the dolphins, are the opposite of a sight. They are a blindness, a spectre reminding the people of their abusive past. The Laotions fished with nets. The Cambodians fished with grenades. Few dolphins survived these dubious techniques, but you can still hire a boat and search for one if you’re feeling lucky.
